---
layout: section-index
date: 2023-02-03
category: samkhya
title: Author's Note
image: 
alt-text: 
---
I first became aware of Samkhya philosophy early in my study of yoga, having come across the term while reading the Bhagavad Gita. Since then, I've studied it in a fair amount of depth, which has greatly aided my understanding and progress in the practice of yoga. In recent years, the text that I've relied on the most has gone out of print, that is, The Samkhya Philosophy by Nandalal Sinha, originally published in 1915. This has created a need for materials that can continue to transmit the philosophy. Toward that end, I've decided to make available free on the internet a version of a text called the Kapila Sutram, or Tattva Samasa (Compilation of Principles). 

The Tattva Samasa is a short work, only twenty-two sutras, and is said to have been used as an introductory text. It is the oldest of the Samkhya texts, and may be the work of Kapila himself, who by all accounts was the first to organize Samkhya philosophy in a systematic way. A translation of the text will be presented along with explanations based on the commentary of Narendra. This is not intended to be a verbatim copy of Narendra's work, but an adaptation with updated language and with all of the salient points included. 

One may rightly ask, why should we study this ancient material? What value does it have for our society that is so much more technologically advanced? Samkhya was the dominant world view of its time and many Hindu texts, especially the Yoga Sutras, were written from its point of view. If we attempt to read the Yoga Sutras, for example, from our own frame of reference, we will not be able to understand it. We must first understand the author's frame of reference before we can make sense of his work.

Samkhya philsophy was the closest thing the ancient world had to science. While not up to modern standards, it demonstrates remarkable intelligence in many ways. And while the Samkhya tattvas may not be scientifically proved in the modern sense, they are nevertheless useful for the purposes of yogic introspection, and they seem to work.

Production of this material is currently in progress. Please check back for updates.