---
layout: section-index
date: 2023-02-04
category: kundalini
title: The Vedanta School of Kundalini
---

Kundalini is a long-standing esoteric yoga practice. Few people understand it correctly and there has been a lot of misinformation, fear, and skepticism around it. There are three main sources of information about Kundalini:

1. The much maligned Yogi Bajan is currently best known,
1. The Self Realization Fellowship and other tantric teachers,
1. The Yoga Kundalini Upanishad and related upanishads.

The Vedanta School of Kundalini is a term coined by Old School Yoga to describe the kundalini taught in the Upanishads, and to differentiate it from the others. The goal of this site is to present accurate information about the practice, so that those who wish to pursue this path can do so with confidence.

Most of the physical practices mentioned in the Yoga Kundalini Upanishad are well known and still in wide use today. These practices are not specific to any particular brand of asana and can easily be adapted to just about any type of practice. Our first task will be to identify these practices, and this will be made freely available. This site will not be providing instruction on specifics of how to perform the practices, since that information is available from many sources who are better qualified than this author. However, students must know how to perform the practices in order to progress.

The physical practice alone leaves a great deal unexplained and will not be sufficient to achieve full awakening. Old School Yoga will concentrate its efforts toward providing the knowledge that will enable individuals to get the most out of their practice.