---
layout: section-index
date: 2022-05-16
category: yoga
title: A Means To An End
---
Yoga Sutras 1.2: *yogas-citta-vrtti-nirodhah*
- *yogas*: yoga
- *citta*: consciousness
- *vrtti*: a function or modification
- *nirodhah*: restriction, restraint, stopping, cessation

*translation*: Yoga is the restraint of the functions of consciousness.

These are some of the best known words in the culture of yoga, but they raise more questions than they answer. What are the functions of consciousness? What is meant by restraint? Why should we restrain or stop the functions of consciousness? The Yoga Sutras answers those questions and more, but for now, let's just say that, according to the Yoga Sutras, the purpose of yoga is to slow down the whirl of consciousness, which is usually caught up in our daily activities, so that we begin to connect with our true self, which is our innermost being.

What? How does this have anything to do with the ladies at the yoga studio? For some people, the whole practice of yoga consists of the asanas they do at the studio, or along with a You Tube video or an app. That's fine, but they're missing out on much that yoga has to offer. The Yoga Sutras goes into many of the deep questions of life. Fundamentally though, yoga is a *practice* that requires individual effort. The asanas are a means to an end, but only one of the means. So, before we get into the philosophy, we should learn a little about the other means. These are known as the Eight Limbs or Asta Anga Yoga.