---
layout: section-index
date: 2023-02-04
category: yoga
title: Jnana + Yoga = Yoga Sutras
---
#### Yoga Sikha Upanishad 1.2
>Some people say that the only way out is Jnana (knowledge). To attain occult powers, that alone will not suffice. How can Jnana without Yoga lead to salvation? It is also true that Yoga alone without Jnana will not lead to salvation. So the one who aims at salvation, should learn Jnana and Yoga together. 

The Yoga Sutras represents the combination of Jnana and Yoga. Large portions of the text are concerned with acquiring and perfecting knowledge, and not only ordinary knowledge but also knowledge that leads to higher consciousness. Old School Yoga regards the Jnana portions as generally not well understood in traditional translations, but correct understanding can be obtained by careful analysis of the text. This material is better suited to those who already have a basic understanding of yoga, and will be presented separately. 

The Yoga Sutras is well known for its enumeration of 8 limbs or members of Yoga.  Patanjali's 8 Limbs are a good place to begin the study of Yoga philosophy. This material will be made available here as a free resource for beginning students. 

Traditionally, the Yoga Sutras are presented in their original order with:  
1. Devanagari script and/or sanskrit words transliterated to roman letters,
1. Translations of individual words,
1. Translation of the sutra as a whole, and
1. Commentary or explanations of the text.

This is done to ensure the integrity of both the original text and the translation, but it is sometimes not particularly helpful to beginning students. In the interest of making the material more accessible to beginners, we take the liberty of dispensing with this convention or using it when it serves our purpose. 

The material has been organized by topic, meaning that the original order of the sutras has not been preserved. However, nothing has been added or left out. The meaning of the text has not been altered, only the order of presentation has been changed.

Finally, the explanations given here are intended to be rather sparse. This is based on the idea that the author's job is to convey the original intent in language that the reader can understand, not to tell the reader what he thinks about it. It is the reader's job to contemplate the text and figure out how it applies to his/her own life. The author can point you in a direction, but he cannot think for you.