---
layout: section
category: yoga
---
### *Sauca* - Cleanliness or Purification
According to Vyasa, there are two categories of *sauca*:
- external - cleanliness of the body and place of residence, eating pure food.
- internal - removal of impurities of the mind such as arrogance or malice.

For understanding *sauca*, it may be helpful to visualize the process of refining a metal. First we have to identify what it is that we are trying to obtain. Then the metal has to be separated from the ore and fired in the crucible in order to remove everything except the desired metal. In the case of the yogi, what is desired is a mind free from the harmful impulses of our lower nature.

The Sutras explain further:
>*Sutra 2.40 - 41*: Through purification, the yogi develops aversion towards his own limbs, and consequently, toward association with others. He attains purity of sattva, pleasant feeling, one-pointedness, mastery of the indriyas, and fitness for perceiving the self.

Having cleansed himself from impurities, the yogi may avoid contact with others who have not done so, in order to maintain his desired state. We see this in religious communities who separate themselves from the world to varying degrees. Those are the people who are most intensely committed to their spiritual development. The majority of people don't go to those extremes, but it is not uncommon for people to want to associate with people who have similar values and lifestyles and to limit their association with others.

Purification rituals can be found in the practices of some yoga traditions. Again, these are the most committed people. Done mindfully, the simple act of showering and making one's bed in the morning can have a similar effect.

Patanjali emphasizes the importance of *sauca* by means of the benefits associated with it. The higher limbs cannot be achieved without it.

#### 2-40
*saucat-sva-anga-jugupsa parair-asamsargah*
- *sauca*: cleanliness, purification
- *sva*: own
- *anga*: member or limb 
- *jugupsa*: disgust, distance, aversion, dislike
- *para*:  other
- *asamsarga*: non-association

*translation*: Through purification, the yogi develops aversion towards his own limbs, and consequently toward association with others. 

#### 2-41
*sattva-suddhi-saumanasya-eka-agrya-indriya-jaya-atma-darsana-yogyatvani ca*
- *sattva-suddhi*: purity of sattva, here left untranlated, *sattva* is a Samkhya term
- *saumanasya*: gladness, satisfaction of mind, pleasantness of feeling
- *eka-agrya*: one-pointedness
- *indriya-jaya*: mastery of the indriyas, another Samkhya term, *indriyas* consist of the organs of cognition (the senses) and action (arms, legs, etc.)
- *atma-darsana*: self vision or perception of the self
- *yogayatva*: fitness or ability
- *ca* and

*translation*: [The yogi attains] purity of sattva, pleasant feeling, one-pointedness, mastery of the indriyas, and fitness for perceiving the self.


