---
layout: section
category: yoga
---

### *Tapas* - austerity, asceticism
The word *tapas* is usually thought of as referring to acts of self-castigation like fasting, not sleeping, remaining still or silent for long periods of time, exposure to heat or cold, etc. In the past the Sutras has been preserved and explained mostly by religious men. These types of practices are common to religions of all stripes, so it is natural that religious men would think of *tapas* in this way. These practices are usually performed as acts of penance or sometimes to demonstrate that the yogi has overcome some of the limitations of the flesh. Patanjali makes a connection between *tapas* and the process of purification discussed in sutras 2-40 - 2-41, stating that the benefits come about through the dwindling of impurity. However, it is difficult to see how such acts can produce the benefits described in sutra 2-43, such as perfection of the body and the *indriyas*. 

For the secular practitioner, a more useful interpretation of *tapas* can perhaps be gained by taking the word at its literal meaning, which is "to be hot". In the practice of Kundalini, production of heat is an essential part of the process. There, the heat is produced through pranayama, but in modern practice, it is through pranayama in conjunction with vigorous asana. Interpreted in this way, it is much easier to see how *tapas* can produce the stated benefits. For the modern practitioner then, *tapas* can consist of any asana that requires some discomfort or enough effort to elevate the heart rate and the breathing, or to create a bit of sweat.

Creating heat in a non-literal way also makes sense. Here we mean heat in the sense of intensity of desire, enthusiasm, earnestness, or ardour.

#### 2-43 *kaya-indriya-siddhir-asuddhi-ksayat-tapasah*
- *kaya* - body
- *indriya* - organs of cognition and action
- *siddhir* - perfection
- *asuddhi* - impurity
- *ksayat* - dwindling or destruction
- *tapasah* - austerity, literally, to be hot 

*translation*: Perfection of the body and *indriyas* is obtained through *tapas*, which brings about the destruction of impurity.
