yoga/asana.md, before:

---
layout: section
category: yoga
title: Asana - Postures
---
### Sutra 2.46
*Sthira-sukham-āsanam*
- *Sthira* = Firm, steady, fixed
- *sukham* = Agreeable, pleasant; Easy practicable; Fit, suitable
- *āsanam* = Sitting down; A seat, place, stool; A particular posture or mode of sitting

*Asana* [should be] steady and comfortable

### Sutra 2.47
*Prayatna-śaithilya-ananta-samāpattibhyām*
- *Prayatna* = Effort, exertion, endeavour
- *śaithilya* = Looseness, laxity, relaxation of rule
- *ananta* = Endless, infinite, eternal, boundless, inexhaustible
- *samāpatti* = Meeting, encountering; assuming an original form

[Accompanied by] relaxation of effort [and the mind] assuming the form of the infinite.

Most translators shy away from the literal meaning of *samapatti* that is used here. Patanjali himself defines *samapatti* as an advanced form of object-focused meditation practice (Sutra 1.41). The apparent meaning is that the yogi should relax to the point where he feels that his body has dissolved into infinity.

### Sutra 2.48
*Tato dvandva-anabhighātaḥ*
- *Tato* = From that (person or place &c.), thence
- *dvandva* = pair, couple; pairs of opposites
- *anabhighātaḥ* = immunity, unassailability,

From that, [the yogi becomes] immune to the pairs of opposites.

### Discussion
In these three sutras, Patanjali seems to be talking about seated asana practice. He appears to be describing a simple and easy form of meditation practice that requires nothing more than becoming still and relaxing the body to the point where the yogi feels that it has dissolved into infinity. Doing only that, the yogi can attain a deep state of meditation. It's important to realize that the feeling of dissolving into infinity is a function of the mind. The yogi should not allow his mind to wander, but remain focused on relaxing not just the body but the mind also.

Following that is the startling claim that this meditation can produce immunity from the pairs of opposites, such as hot and cold, joy and sorrow. Some yogis have been known to meditate in extremes of heat and cold to try to prove this point. The practice is more likely to succeed when used to maintain equanimity or to get a brief respite from the cares of everyday life. The ability to maintain equanimity under stress is one of the most valuable skills a person can have.

These sutras are fairly cut and dried, but how to apply them to a modern yoga practice is an open question. A modern practice is much more movement oriented and sometimes involves a great deal of effort, with a lot of emphasis on health and fitness. Clearly that is not what Patanjali had in mind. Recall that the eight limbs are concerned with elimination of impurities and illumination of understanding. Asana as described here doesn't fit neatly into either of those categories. However, the modern yogi may find that the focus on simply relaxing the body and the mind is helpful in achieving the calm, focused mind needed for the practices described later.

Commit message:

Update content asana.md + pranayama.md

yoga/asana.md, after:

---
layout: section
category: yoga
title: Asana - Postures
---
### Sutra 2.46
*Sthira-sukham-āsanam*
- *Sthira* = Firm, steady, fixed
- *sukham* = Agreeable, pleasant; Easy practicable; Fit, suitable
- *āsanam* = Sitting down; A seat, place, stool; A particular posture or mode of sitting

*Asana* [should be] steady and comfortable

### Sutra 2.47
*Prayatna-śaithilya-ananta-samāpattibhyām*
- *Prayatna* = Effort, exertion, endeavour
- *śaithilya* = Looseness, laxity, relaxation of rule
- *ananta* = Endless, infinite, eternal, boundless, inexhaustible
- *samāpatti* = Meeting, encountering; assuming an original form

[Accompanied by] relaxation of effort [with the mind] assuming the form of the infinite.

Most translators shy away from the literal meaning of *samapatti* that is used here. Patanjali himself defines *samapatti* as an advanced form of object-focused meditation practice (Sutra 1.41). The apparent meaning is that the yogi should relax to the point where he feels that his body has dissolved into infinity.

### Sutra 2.48
*Tato dvandva-anabhighātaḥ*
- *Tato* = From that (person or place &c.), thence
- *dvandva* = pair, couple; pairs of opposites
- *anabhighātaḥ* = immunity, unassailability,

From that, [the yogi becomes] immune to the pairs of opposites.

### Discussion
In these three sutras, Patanjali seems to be talking about seated asana practice. He appears to be describing a simple and easy form of meditation practice that requires nothing more than becoming still and relaxing the body to the point where the yogi feels that it has dissolved into infinity. Doing only that, the yogi can attain a deep state of meditation. It's important to realize that the feeling of dissolving into infinity is a function of the mind. The yogi should not allow his mind to wander, but remain focused on relaxing not just the body but the mind also.

Following that is the startling claim that this meditation can produce immunity from the pairs of opposites, such as hot and cold, joy and sorrow. Some yogis have been known to meditate in extremes of heat and cold to try to prove this point. The practice is more likely to succeed when used to maintain equanimity or to get a brief respite from the cares of everyday life. The ability to maintain equanimity under stress is one of the most valuable skills a person can have.

These sutras are fairly cut and dried, but how to apply them to a modern yoga practice is an open question. A modern practice is much more movement oriented and sometimes involves a great deal of effort, with a lot of emphasis on health and fitness. Clearly that is not what Patanjali had in mind, but that should not stop us from finding ways to apply the sutras in practice, and this can be done in different ways. The modern yogi should find that the focus on simply relaxing the body and the mind will be helpful in achieving the calm, focused mind needed for the practices described later.
